Welcome, boys and girls, to another junkies lecture.
In this lecture we are going to learn what is Jenkins Multi Branch Pipeline as well as C++ in action.
All right, let's get started.
Sometimes your project git repository might have more than one branches.
For example, you could have multiple teams working on your applications.
Parallelly.
Or you could have different environment on your git repository.
For example, you could have four different branches main branch for production, staging for staging
environment dev for development and sandbox for sandbox environment.
What if any time a branch is created and changes are pushed to that branch, you want to trigger a separate
Jenkins job, but instead of instrumenting different Jenkins job for different branches, you want to
automate it.
So basically at this point, instead of creating four different Jenkins job, you will create one Jenkins
job, which will point to all the branches in this repository.
And if a new branch gets created, let's say, for load testing, you don't need to go and create another
Jenkins job.
This multi branch Jenkins job will automatically discover the branch and start running only for that
branch.
So one thing that's needed in this setting is each branch should have its separate Jenkins file.
So for example, in this case for Branch Main, we have this Jenkins file.
These Jenkins files are just printing out the name of the branch, let's say in this case, echo main
branch.
So if I go to staging branch, it's saying echo staging branch for dev, it's saying echo dev branch.
And for sandbox, it's saying echo sandbox branch.
But as we see in any Jenkins file, you can code whatever you want in this separate Jenkins file.
So for sandbox, you can spin up specific infrastructure, do some specific code testing.
For Dev, you could do separate things.
You got the idea.
So now let's jump into Jenkins and try to create a multi branch pipeline job.
Click New item give a name.
We'll give the name multi branch test zero one.
So generally we selected a freestyle or pipeline.
So scroll down and here you will see multi branch pipeline.
So click multi branch pipeline, click okay under branch sources select get.
And here you have to give the project repository.
Go back to the GitHub repository and then select the https URL.
Go back to the Jenkins.
Pasteur.
This is a public repository, so we don't need credentials.
So as you could see, this job will automatically discover the branches and it comes from the git plugin.
You can also add additional discovery features such as discover tags, filter by name, etc..
But for this demo I'm just going to keep this as discover branches.
Now build configuration script path is Jenkins file.
So basically it expects each branch to have a Jenkins file.
Now this is the important part.
Scan multi branch pipeline triggers.
First time it will automatically discover the branches and run the Jenkins jobs for those different
branches.
But then you have to select this periodically, if not otherwise, run.
So basically periodically it will go check if additional branches are created and run those.
So for now, I'm just going to set it for 10 minutes.
All right, scroll down.
Click Save.
So you could see it scanning the multi branch.
It found those four branches branch main, branch, sandbox, branch staging and branch dev.
Then it submitted this Jenkins job for all four branches.
Parallelly.
At the same time, you did not need to create four separate Jenkins jobs for each branch.
So if I refresh the page, it ran the job for four different branches.
So if you want to see the output, you can simply click this icon and then go to console output.
Scroll down.
It says Def Branch.
Similarly, it's going to say the same thing for the other branches.
If we go to main console output, scroll down.
It is going to say main branch.
You can also selectively run the job for separate branches.
So for example, if you want to rebuild the job for the sandbox branch, you can just click build now
and it will submit the job for the sandbox branch.
And if I refresh this page.
So I submitted it twice so you could see the last success.
Number three, whereas other branch are still at number one.
So, all right, so let's go back to the repository and create another branch.
Let's say we want to create the branch integration testing from the main branch.
We'll go to the Jenkins file and edit it.
And here we will just put.
All right, let's commit our changes directly.
And then if we go back to the Jenkins job, remember, we set this up as every 10 minutes it's going
to scan.
Or you can scan the multi branch pipeline now and it will go and scan.
One thing to remember is it will automatically detect what is the new branch.
So when it submits for the next time it is only going to submit for the new branch unless something
is changed in the existing branches.
All right.
So I'm going to pause the video and I would let the Jenkins job automatically discover the new branch
and resubmit itself.
All right.
10 minutes have passed.
Let's refresh this page.
And like I said, the job ran only for the new branch integration, testing all the other branches that
did not run because nothing was changed.
And you could tell this by looking at the build number.
Everything else said one one and we manually submitted the sandbox.
So it's three.
Staging is one.
All right, folks, that's how you create and configure a multi branch pipeline.
I wanted to give my input before I end this video, so I worked in a Real World DevOps project and I
interact with a lot of customers where they are running a lot of DevOps pipeline.
So in real world projects, traditional Jenkins pipeline job is used way more than this multi branch
pipeline job.
The reason is no one really keeps different branches under one repository for different environments
because it makes access control very difficult.
You want to have separate access control for your production repository than your DB repository than
your test repository.
Now keeping everything in one repository in multiple branches makes it a little more complicated.
Similarly, on the flip side, the Jenkins job for different environments should have different access
as well.
So having one multi brand job for production test dev integration testing environment means it's way
too much access for one Jenkins job.
So it has the potential to mess up multiple environment if something goes wrong.
But multi branch pipeline is useful if you are testing out something in that test environment and multiple
people are working in different branches and immediately want to test out their changes automatically.
Parallelly before the march, everything into one branch, then it comes in handy.
All right, folks, now you know what is multi branch pipeline and how to use it?
I'll see you guys and girls in the next lecture.